By CNN Staff
Updated: Tue, 29 Mar 2022 21:36:27 GMT


Why should I sign up for CNN+?
Because it combines live news coverage, a library of on-demand programming and interactive interviews into a new subscription streaming service, available on a wide variety of devices. If you like CNN, you'll love CNN+.
How much does CNN+ cost?
The product costs $5.99 a month or $59.99 a year. 
Where can I find CNN+?
You can stream CNN+ using your web browser, the CNN mobile app (Android and iOS), or the CNN app on Apple TV and Amazon Fire TV streaming devices.
What does CNN+ include?
A full slate of live and on-demand daily and weekly shows from familiar CNN faces like Anderson Cooper and Poppy Harlow and fresh personalities like distinguished anchor Chris Wallace, basketball legend Rex Chapman and acclaimed radio host Audie Cornish.
Are CNN's original series and films included?
Yes — an impressive library of award-winning content from original series like "Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown" and "Stanley Tucci: Searching for Italy" and CNN Films like "Blackfish" and "RBG." More than 1,000 titles are available.
What is the weekday schedule?
"Five Things with Kate Bolduan" begins the day at 7 a.m. ET, followed by "Go There" at 8 a.m., "The Big Picture with Sara Sidner" at 9 a.m., "Reliable Sources Daily" at 11 a.m., "The Source with Kasie Hunt" at 4 p.m., "The Global Brief with Bianca Nobilo" at 5 p.m., "Who's Talking to Chris Wallace?" at 6 p.m., and "The Newscast with Wolf Blitzer" at 7:30.
Does CNN+ include CNN's existing TV channels?
No, CNN+ is a completely new product designed for a digital, streaming age. It does not simulcast CNN's existing channels; you'll still need a pay TV subscription to see those. But CNN's app will continue to let pay TV subscribers sign in and stream our channels.
What is "Interview Club?"
"Interview Club" is an interactive interview experience that is unique to CNN. The technology enables users to submit questions and hear answers from CNN reporters, newsmakers and expert guests in moderated sessions.
