Analysis by Chris Cillizza, CNN Editor-at-large
Updated: Wed, 30 Mar 2022 20:24:57 GMT
Source: CNN

There's really only one question these days for North Carolina Rep. Madison Cawthorn: Who?
As in, who are the people that allegedly invited the Republican congressman to orgies in Washington? And who are the people who he allegedly witnessed doing cocaine?
Cawthorn's allegations resulted in House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy and House Minority Whip Steve Scalise calling him into a meeting Wednesday. 
"I'm very disappointed. I told him he's lost my trust," McCarthy said after the meeting, according to CNN's Melanie Zanona. "He's lost my trust. He's going to have to earn it back."  
McCarthy also said that when pressed, Cawthorn basically admitted he either exaggerated or made up the allegations. "He did not tell the truth. That's unacceptable," said McCarthy.
Cawthorn still has not commented publicly on the remarks he made in an interview with the "Warrior Poet Society" podcast recently. (I've asked Cawthorn's office for comment twice since Monday but haven't heard back either time.)
In case you missed what Cawthorn originally said, here it is:
"The sexual perversion that goes on in Washington ... being kind of a young guy in Washington, where the average age is probably 60 or 70 -- [you] look at all these people, a lot of them that I've looked up to through my life, I've always paid attention to politics. ... Then all of a sudden you get invited -- 'We're going to have a sexual get-together at one of our homes, you should come.' ... What did you just ask me to come to? And then you realize they're asking you to come to an orgy. ... Some of the people leading on the movement to try and remove addiction in our country, and then you watch them do a key bump of cocaine right in front of you. And it's like, this is wild."
Which is a VERY big allegation to make without naming any names.
That's not just my opinion either. Here's North Carolina Republican Sen. Thom Tillis on Cawthorn's claims: "I thought about the statement. If it's true, then he's got a lot of information to reveal. If it's not true, then he's guilty of being untruthful."
And here's North Carolina's other Republican senator, Richard Burr, when asked about Cawthorn's job performance: "That's for his constituents to figure out but clearly he's been an embarrassment at times."
Burr and Tillis were far from alone in expressing concerns. Zanona also noted that House Republicans complained about Cawthorn's remarks during a closed-door session on Tuesday: "GOP lawmakers said his comments were upsetting and harmful, and complained they were now receiving questions from constituents about it. They also said If his comments are true then he needs to name names because otherwise it unfairly maligns the entire institution," reported Zanona.
All of which means that the ball is now very clearly in Cawthorn's court. He is firmly in put up or shut up territory.
So, does he have the receipts? Or will he be forced to publicly admit that the whole thing was made up -- perhaps to impress a podcast host and his audience?
That Cawthorn finds himself embroiled in controversy is nothing new.  
To recap: Cawthorn was charged earlier this month for driving with a revoked driver's license for the second time in five years. He recently was recorded on video calling Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky a "thug" and the Ukrainian government "incredibly evil." And last year, CNN reported on allegations of sexual misconduct women made against Cawthorn stemming from when his time in college. (Cawthorn has denied any wrongdoing.)
And remember Cawthorn has been in Congress less than two years.
Tillis put it best when asked about Cawthorn's allegations of orgies and cocaine use: "I thought it was a silly statement and it's not the first one."
This story has been updated with comments from Kevin McCarthy. 
